He was an old man who fished alone in a skiff in the Gulf Stream and he had gone eighty-four days now without taking a fish. 

他是一个独自一人划着小船在墨西哥湾大海流打鱼的老人，他已经有八十四天没有捕到一条鱼了。

In the first forty days a boy had been with him.

在最初的四十天里，有一个小男孩陪他一起。

But after forty days without a fish the boy's parents had told him that the old man was now definitely and finally salao, which is the worst form of unluckly, and the boy had gone at their orders in another boat which caught three good fish the first week.

但是四十天没捕到一条鱼，男孩的父母告诉男孩，老人绝对是厄运至极，于是男孩听了父母的吩咐，随着另一条船捕鱼，第一个星期就捕到了三条大鱼。

It made the boy sad to see the old man come in each day with his skiff empty and he always went down to help him carry either the coiled lines or the gaff and harpoon and the sail that was furled around the mast.

看见老人每天都空船而归，男孩着实伤心。他经常去帮助老人拿钓线或者鱼叉，还有绕着桅杆卷起的帆。

The sail was patched with flour sacks and, furled, it looked like the flag of permanent defeat.

帆上用面粉袋打着补丁，卷起来的时候，看上去像一面永远失败的旗帜。

The old man was thin and gaunt with deep wrinkles in the back of his neck.

老人身材纤瘦，面容憔悴，背后脖颈上有深深地皱纹。

The brown blotches of the benevolent skin cancer the sun brings from its reflection on the tropic sea were on his cheeks.

他脸颊上有棕色的斑痕，那是热带海面太阳反光造成的良性皮肤病。

The blotches ran well down the sides of his face and his hands had the deep-creased scars from handling heavy fish on the cords.   But none of these scars were fresh. They were as old as erosions in a fishless desert.

斑痕跑满了他的脸颊，他手上有着拉鱼时留下的深深的伤痕，但都不是新的，那些伤痕就像干涸无鱼的沙漠沟壑一样古老。

Everything about him was old except his eyes and they were the same color as the sea and were cheerful and undefeated.

他身上一切都是老旧的，除了眼睛，他的眼睛有着和大海一样的颜色，炯炯有神，永不言败。

"Santiago," the boy said to him as they climbed the bank from where the skiff was hauled up. "I could go with you again. We’ve made some money."

“圣地亚哥”，男孩一边说，一边和老人拖船上岸，“我又可以和你一同捕鱼了，我们可以赚些钱”。

The old man had taught the boy to fish and the boy loved him.

老人教会男孩如何捕鱼，男孩很爱老人。

"No," the old man said. "You’re with a lucky boat. Stay with them."

“不”，老人说，“你上了一条幸运的船，就继续跟着它吧”

"But remember how you went eighty-seven days without fish and then we caught big ones every day for three weeks."

“但是你记不记得，你出海八十七天，一条鱼都没有捕到，然后我们接连三个星期，天天都能捕到大鱼。”

"I remember," the old man said. "I know you did not leave me because you doubted."

“我当然记得”，老人说，“我知道你不是因为疑心我运气变坏而离开”

"It was papa made me leave. I am a boy and I must obey him."

“是爸爸让我离开，我还是个小孩，我必须听他的。”

"I know," the old man said. "It is quite normal."

“我知道”，老人说，”这太正常不过了。“

"He hasn’t much faith."

”他只是信念不足。“

"No," the old man said. "But we have. Haven’t we? "

”他没有“，老人说，”但是我们有信念，不是吗？“

"Yes," the boy said. "Can I offer you a beer on the Terrace and then we’ll take the stuff home."

”是的“，男孩说，”我请你去露天小店喝杯啤酒，然后我们把东西弄回家，怎样？“

"Why not?" the old man said. "Between fishermen."

”何乐而不为呢？“，老人说，”和渔夫们一起。“

They sat on the Terrace and many of the fishermen made fun of the old man and he was not angry. 

他们坐在露天小店里，好多渔夫拿老人取笑逗乐子，老人并不生气。

Others, of the older fishermen, looked at him and were sad.

其他一些年长的渔夫，难过地看着老人。

But they did not show it and they spoke politely about the current and the depths they had drifted their lines at and the steady good weather and of what they had seen.

不过他们并不流露出来，只是很客气地谈论海流和垂钓的深度，还有平稳的好天气和他们的见闻。

The successful fishermen of that day were already in and had butchered their marlin out and carried them laid full length across two planks, with two men staggering at the end of each plank, to the fish house where they waited for the ice truck to carry them to the market in Havana.

成功捕鱼而归的渔夫已经进来了，捕杀的马林鱼整只平放在两个厚木板上，木板的两头被人抬着，踉踉跄跄走进鱼房，鱼房里等着冰卡车，准备把鱼运到哈瓦那市场上去。

Those who had caught sharks had taken them to the shark factory on the other side of the cove where they were hoisted on a block and tackle, their livers removed, their fins cut off and their hides skinned out and their flesh cut into strips for salting.

有人捕到鲨鱼，运到小海湾一侧的鲨鱼工厂里，用滑车吊着，取了肝脏，砍了鳍，剥掉皮，肉切成一条一条的，撒上盐。

When the wind was in the east a smell came across the harbour from the shark factory; but today there was only the faint edge of the odour because the wind had backed into the north and then dropped off and it was pleasant and sunny on the Terrace.

鲨鱼厂的味道随着东风越过海湾飘了过来；但今天，只有微弱的一点点味道，因为转了北风，然后风惜了，露天小店沐浴在阳光下很宜人。

"Santiago," the boy said.

“圣地亚哥”，男孩说。

"Yes," the old man said. He was holding his glass and thinking of many years ago.

”嗯“，老人回答道。他手里握着酒杯，正在回想多年前的事情。

"Can I go out to get sardines for you for tomorrow? "

”我去弄点沙丁鱼，给你明天用吧？“

"No. Go and play baseball. I can still row and Rogelio will throw the net."

”不用了，去玩棒球吧，我还能划船，罗格里奥会帮我撒网。“

"I would like to go. If I cannot fish with you, I would like to serve in some way."

”我很想去，如果不能和你一起捕鱼，我想帮你做点什么别的事。“

"You bought me a beer," the old man said. "You are already a man."

”你请我喝了啤酒“，老人说，“你已经是一个大人了。”

"How old was I when you first took me in a boat? "

“你第一次带我上船时，我几岁？”

"Five and you nearly were killed when I brought the fish in too green and he nearly tore the boat to pieces. Can you remember? "

“五岁，有一次我把一条活蹦乱跳的鱼拖上船，你差点送了命，船差点散了架，你还记得吗？”

"I can remember the tail slapping and banging and the thwart breaking and the noise of the clubbing. I can remember you throwing me into the bow where the wet coiled lines were and feeling the whole boat shiver and the noise of you clubbing him like chopping a tree down and the sweat blood smell all over me."

“我记得它的尾巴使劲拍打着、撞击着，船的横梁断了，还有你用木棍打它的声音。我记得你把我放在船头，那里有湿湿的鱼线，我感觉整条船都在摇晃，还有你打鱼的声音，就像砍树一样，弄得我周身都是血腥味。”

"Can you really remember that or did I just tell it to you? "

“你真的记得这些么，还是我告诉你的？”

"I remember everything from when we first went together."

“自从我们第一次一起出去，样样我都记得。”

The old man looked at him with his sun-burned, confident loving eyes.

老人看着他，一双眼睛饱经日晒，自信坚定，充满慈爱。

"If you were my boy I’d take you out and gamble,“ he said. “But you are your father’s and your mother’s and you are in a lucky boat."

你要是我的孩子，我一定带着你去碰碰运气，”他说，“可你是你爸爸妈妈的孩子，又跟了一条运气很好的船。”

"May I get the sardines? I know where I can get four baits too."

“我去弄点沙丁鱼来吧？我还知道有一个地方可以弄到四个鱼饵。”

"I have mine left from today. I put them in salt in the box."

“今天我还有剩余，我把它们放在盒子里腌着。”

"Let me get four fresh ones."

“那让我给你弄四条新鲜的来。”

"One," the old man said. His hope and his confidence had never gone. But now they were freshening as when the breeze rises.

“一条吧”，老人说，他的希望和信心从未消逝。但如今，它们又如同微风拂起般焕然一新。

"Two," the boy said.

“两条”，男孩说。

"Two," the old man agreed. "You didn’t steal them?"

“两条吧”，老人同意道，“你不会去偷吧？”

"I would," the boy said. "But I bought these."

“我愿意去偷”，男孩说，“不过这是我买的。”

"Thank you,"  the old man said. He was too simple to wonder when he had attained humility. But he knew he had attained it and he knew it was not disgraceful and it carried no loss of true pride.

“谢谢，”老人说道。他太质朴了，从未想过自己是什么时候变得谦逊的。但他知道自己已经达到了这种境界，而且他知道这并不丢脸，也不会失去真正的自尊。

"Tomorrow is going to be a good day with this current," he said.

“有了这股海流，明天一定会是个好天气，”他说道。

"Where are you going?" the boy asked.

“那你准备上哪儿？”男孩问。

"Far out to come in when the wind shifts. I want to be out before it is light."

“往远处去，等风向一变，就往回走，我要在天亮之前就出海。”

"I’ll try to get him to work far out," the boy said. "Then if you hook something truly big we can come to your aid."

”我会让他去更远处工作”，男孩说，“要是你钓到了真正的大货，我们就能去帮你。”

"He does not like to work too far out."

“他可不喜欢去很远的地方工作。”

"No," the boy said. "But I will see something that he cannot see such as a bird working and get him to come out after dolphin."

“不会，”男孩说，“但我能看到他看不到的东西，比如有鸟在觅食，我会让他划出去追海豚。”

"Are his eyes that bad?"

“他的眼睛真的有那么不好吗？”

"He is almost blind."

“他差不多瞎了。”

"It is strange," the old man said. "He never went turtle-ing. That is what kills the eyes."

“真奇怪，”老人说道，“他从没去抓过海龟，那才是毁掉眼睛的原因。”

"But you went turtle-ing for years off the Mosquito Coast and your eyes are good."

“但是你在蚊子海岸抓了好多年的海龟，可你的眼睛却很好。”

"I am a strange old man."

“我是个怪老头儿。”

"But are you strong enough now for a truly big fish?"

“但是你现在有足够的力气去对付一条真正的大鱼吗？”

"I think so. And there are many tricks."

“我想是的。而且还有很多诀窍。”

"Let us take the stuff home,“ the boy said. “So I can get the cast net and go after the sardines."

“我们把东西拿回家吧，”男孩说，“这样我就可以拿上抛网去捕沙丁鱼了。”